Very full on volume.
Thank you. Thank you.
Now, I'll just start
with
giving an example of why
it's important to be counted.
So I'm older, my parents are dead. I'm not
going to be kicked out of my home if I disclose
information about my identity. That's not the
situation for everybody. I've come here today wearing a
T-shirt saying, "Challenge biphobia."
Even wearing that in some countries in the world would be enough to get me put in
jail. But that's not Aotearoa, New Zealand.
However, it is important that we recognize why people,
particularly those who may come from different places in the world, may be
hesitant about sharing information about themselves through
administrative data,
which they are not confident about being kept
safe, secure. They don't know whether it'll be confidential.
They may be a younger person living in a conservative family
who is uncomfortable about their
parents seeing them for who they are.
This is so for the whole of the rainbow communities,
LGBTIQ+, and all the MVP, FAF,
Pasifika terms. These are issues of social
stigma. And the 2023 census,
as you will know, was the first time that people were able to
self-identify and disclose confidentially
information about themselves in a way that meant that they could be counted, and
that that information could then feed into planning for
services, for
a whole range of areas where it's important to be counted, like
173,000 people on the LGBT+ communities
in Aotearoa in 2023. And Statistics NZ
admits that's an underestimate because there are still concerns
about that confidentiality and trust.
But if we compare that to administrative data first,
and you asked agencies to give a count, you would
probably get maybe 10% of that.
As a bisexual person, I have never been asked my sexual
orientation by any government agency that has recorded my
information before that 2023 census.
So that is invisible information about me.
The same with people from
different iwi and hapū who may never have been when they're--
They might identify as Māori, but it may not go any further.
They may not
be asked that. So administrative data has got massive gaps,
and that is a risk. So as you will have seen from my...
I echo a lot of previous submissions about
even if we were living in a perfect society where people felt confident
sharing information about themselves, we're not there yet, and yet that
information is really important.
And
there's lots of things I could say, but I'll-- Oh, and just that
when I say it's really important, I used to help run hackathons using sort of data
that's been collected from sources, and I know how important it is to business, but
I'll stop there. Any questions?
Right. Thank you, Kaye.
I think- Question. That's very good. Points well made. And thank you.
As we are busy, you're also busy in that-
Yes
... you've got a lengthy submission, so thank you for that today.
Yes. And I'll just show this to the point of the camera that I don't know if it can
be seen, but I'm wearing badges so that when I'm traveling,
people can know that I'm safe to engage with
and I'm being counted. But as I say, lots of people don't have that luxury.
Okay. Thank you very much.
Thank you.
Right.
Now, Elizabeth Walker, I think, is that right?
Hello.
Hello. Hey, Elizabeth. We can hear you.
Great.
We got five minutes with you.
Thank you. My name is Elizabeth Walker. Good afternoon.
I'm here today to ask the committee to commission an independent report
expert review of the admin data first model and consequent
cessation of the periodic census of populations and dwellings
before it's too late.
Just put my camera on.
I have-
Oh,
hello.
You heard my intro?
Yes.
Okay. I have over 40 years' experience working in the data modeling,
management, and governance of data.
I worked for New Zealand Statistics Department,
DataBank New Zealand, Westpac New Zealand, and then had 20 years with
Teradata Data Warehouse, where for 10 years I
governed all Asia Pacific client data projects across industries and
government.
I've encountered a lot of data designs and data problems, especially data
gaps.
When clients had manual or perhaps no source systems
in place for crucial data items, data warehouse projects
were inevitably delayed or halted, and the
client's ensuing business plans and projects were also put on hold.
I'm humbled by the range and depth of expert testimony here
today.
Please consider the impact of data gaps and low-quality
data on New Zealand Government's decision-making and change
management capabilities, as so many people described.
I believe that data
and data quality are the lifeblood of every organization and every
government in our modern digital world.
And without the census data, you've heard that we stand to lose the
kete, or basket, or spine perhaps that connects,
and contains all our people information, identifying individuals,
dwelling location, ages, relationships to their households,
and in most cases, that's their family.We'll lose
granular data about individuals and families
coming directly from people. That's you and me, so
it's more accurate and probably the most highly trusted data in government
and beyond. It's more than a century
of continuous high-quality
longitudinal data, and data that
directly affects
electoral boundaries, foundation of our democracy.
Apart from the census, no government department counts and locates all people
present in New Zealand, as you've heard.
And I don't think I can be represented in the same way as
a taxpayer, a beneficiary, a patient, a land
holder. Government departments hold only slim
slices of data, as we would say.
New Zealand's population statistics are key pieces of our national
infrastructure. I view the census data as playing a pivotal
role
in New Zealand's national population statistics.
I was pleased to see Koi Tū come up
before me. I was going to talk about
how much I supported their proposals and how
integral I saw the census as part of
the population strategy that they were talking about.
I can say more, but to conclude, along with the
repercussions that experts here describe, it's the lack of
process and rigor that I've heard this morning in reaching this
point that is perhaps most disturbing.
Please reconsider our loss of population and family data,
and commission an independent expert review of the decisions and
options regarding the census before it is
abandoned. Thank you very much for listening.
Are there any questions?
Yeah. Thank you, Elizabeth. Now, any questions from anyone?
This is good. Straightforward.
No?
Thank you, Elizabeth. That's very good.
And we've got a number of submissions on the same topic, so
I think we'll get a pretty comprehensive view on the issues.
But thank you very much for your contribution.
Thank you.
Right. Now, we've got Steve Farrow, is it?
Steve, please come to the table.
We've got five minutes with you.
Steve.
Hi, I'm Steve Farrow.
I thank the Select Committee and its
administrators
for providing me with the opportunity to make this
oral submission.
I assume you have read my written submission-
We could
... or have it in front of you, so I will not challenge your intellect
by reading it to you.
My background, I studied history and political science and other stuff at
University of Canterbury in the first half of the 1970s.
Then I spent my working life as a high school teacher, and then a union
membership educator.
The only difference between those two roles was that
union members didn't view me as a boss,
so didn't tell me to F off.
I'm now happily retired, but still interested in New Zealand current affairs
and political and equity issues.
One thing the committee needs to know is that I take this opportunity
seriously. That is why the Clerk of the House will receive
a bill from me for the trees I have used and the ink
cartridges I have emptied to print and read the
document
for an omnibus bill,
and that's really hard, especially for individual submitters.
My written submission canvassed the high-level concerns I have.
The bill and the documents that support it,
as have been mentioned just before us,
have sort of allayed my concerns about the effects on the Electoral
Act and process to adjust
constituency boundaries.
I think one document told me that entrenched clauses of the act
would remain.
That I know about them proves that I listened during my pol sci
lectures way back when.
I'm convinced that Admin Data First
should be able to provide the data required.
What really concerns me is that, as we have heard
already, Admin Data First will not
have the data required to know about really
important stuff.
Government health data does not capture and is often
withheld from the government by minority,
but important segments of the population,
Maori, Pasifika, disabled, women, gender
diverse, youth, GLBTQI++++,
homeless, poorly
housed, unemployed, those suffering mental
health issues,
those recently released from prison,
et cetera. Even the
proposed census attribute
surveys,
I think they're called, will not capture such groups unless
well-constructed and probably larger than the
3% to 5%
of the population
that has been posited. A friend of mine even more
retired than me spent his working life as a senior
statistician.He had never heard of the
admin data first methodology,
and the survey sample sizes are very
concerning to him.
An equally worrying feature is the movement of the
2028 census to 2030.
The only reason given is to allow the government statistician
and government entities to get their ducks in a row.
Over the last 150 odd years, the only
missed censuses were for issues of
biblical proportions:
world depression,
world war,
earthquake catastrophe, and world
pestilence.
Do such as civil service convenience
and seriously bad weather now count as
of biblical importance?
I do not want to argue with others who I'm sure
have argued for themselves. But as an individual,
I'm very concerned, uncomfortable, about the
intention to move the 2028 census
to 2030, for the effect it will have
on Maori in particular.
That move explicitly shifts
consultation with Maori to the new date
rather than before the 2029 election.
Why can't the new super and modern system not
begin such consultation from about now?
You may think I'm a grumpy old man. I see on the oral submitters list
that you will soon hear from Brian Easton.
He wouldn't know me from a bar of soap, but I remember him as a
relatively young economics lecturer who frequented
the town site student cafeteria in
Christchurch in the early 1970s. You'll
find out whether the Data and Statistics Census Amendment
Bill makes him grumpier than me.
Thank you for your time, and I'm happy for questions
should there be any.
Hey, thanks, Steve.
Thoughtful.
Hey. Thank you. Very thoughtful submission.
Right.
Mr. Craig Atkinson, is it?
Craig, are you with
us?
Craig, are you with us?
All right, cool.
Hello.
Hello. We can hear you. We can see you. Hey, Craig.
We've seen you before.
Kia ora.
We've seen you before. Good to have you with us again.
Good to be with the GSC, the GSC, and that
again. Yeah, no, I'd keep it very short for you.
I don't agree with it. I think that you've, by the professional
people that specialize in this area, pointed out, it's been
tried in 20 countries, and not worked, and you really haven't got a clue.
And you're just guessing at
what to do. I think there's a point with
algorithms that comes up with election times and all that information that you
collect on us.
And yeah, so no, I disagree with it. Put this one in the bin with the rest of them.
Thank you.
All right. Hey, thank you. Any-
Straightforward.
Last time we called, it was a beautiful day, and it looks like another beautiful
day.
It's always sunshine in Paihia, mate.
I know. That's what you always say.
Hey, thank you very much.
Kia ora. Thank you.
Bye-bye.
Right. Now,
We Create,
Mr. Paul Browning, is it?
Paul, are you with us?
Yes. Good afternoon.
Hello. Nice to hear from you.
Oh, sorry, it's Paula, is it?
This is Paula, yes.
Oh, sorry, I had you down as Paul. So,
apologies for that. Nice to have you with us this afternoon, Paula. Mm.
Kia ora, and thank you for having me.
I'm the executive director of We Create.
We Create is the alliance of New Zealand's creative industry
associations and creative organizations, representing
over 30,000 Kiwi creatives and creative businesses
across all creative industries, from games, to music, to screen, to publishing,
fashion, architecture, advertising, design, performing, and visual arts.
We note that the creative sector is highly digital in how the products and
services we make and sell are created, marketed,
distributed, and consumed. We're here today because this bill
matters, not just to the government and statisticians, but to every
creative professional in this country whose work and value is
currently mostly invisible to government data systems.
We Create has engaged with the New Zealand government data system for over a
decade. We commissioned NZIR to produce the first
comprehensive valuation of the creative sector in 2016
because government data could not tell that story.
In 2026, it still cannot tell it accurately.
As it currently operates, the data system does not see us, and without
deliberate intervention, this bill will lock in and magnify that
invisibility.
The creative industries are not a niche concern for the data system.
The Ministry for Culture and Heritage reports that the sector contributed
18.5 billion to GDP in 2025 and
employed 122,000 New Zealanders or
4.4% of the total workforce.Creative sectors are
defined by UNCTAD and many advanced economies as
high-value economic contributors.
In New Zealand, the Cabinet-approved Amplify Creative and Cultural Strategy
sets out an evidence framework as a core government commitment and
deliverable under the strategy. That commitment cannot be delivered if the
underlying data infrastructure is broken.
The data system used by Infometrics to produce data for MCH
continues to draw from data systems that do not accurately reflect the
creative sector and occupations as they exist today,
and have no mechanism for keeping up with technology change.
If we transition to an admin data-first census model without fixing
the foundations of the existing system, we will entrench what is
already broken.
The bill's regulatory impact statement acknowledges that certain communities will
be harder to measure under the new model and may require tailored
solutions. The creative sector meets this definition in every
respect. Let me be specific about why.
The freelance and portfolio work reality.
The creative sector has double the number of freelancers and contractors of any
other sector in the economy. Our workforce is characterized by
multi-occupation, project-based, and good structured employment.
Admin data systems built around the employer-employee
model are structurally ill-equipped to capture this reality.
Most of government policy, including in education and vocational
training, is still predicated on an employment model that is simply
outdated for our sector. That must change, and this bill is
the place to begin fixing it.
The IRD single occupation model
currently allows only a single occupation to be reported.
For a sound engineer who also teaches, composes, and earns royalties from a
streaming platform, that single field is not just
incomplete, it is misleading. If IRD data becomes a
pillar of the new census model, these gaps become structural features,
not temporary limitations.
The classification code problem is still unresolved.
ANZSIC and ANZSOC codes must be updated to reflect the realities of
modern and evolving creative and digital economy.
The census transition should not proceed without addressing these
gaps. The digital industries and the rear view mirror
problem. Every industry in our membership is digital, yet existing
data systems do not capture the breadth or depth of value created by
digital creative work. The new census model must build in
live mechanisms to capture emerging digital industries and
occupations on an ongoing basis, not simply take a
snapshot of where the economy was at the last classification review.
The investment and infrastructure gap.
We want to be direct with the committee about something that underlies all of this.
The minister's announcement framed this bill primarily around cost reduction.
Where Create's concern is that building a new census model on admin data
that already misrepresents and underrepresents the creative sector
and doing so to save money is a false economy.
We are skeptical that data of sufficient quality and accuracy sits in
government agencies, and that it can be extracted into the data system
using resources within agencies' existing budget lines.
Data is an economic asset. Its value is seen most
clearly in big tech and artificial intelligence companies, where
vast volumes of data underpin revenue at scale.
The New Zealand government has not sufficiently prioritized or invested in data
systems, particularly in the last three decades, as technology
change made better data capture more feasible, not less.
We have seen
what a deliberate and resourced approach to data can
deliver. When Toi Māi, the Workforce Development Council for Creative,
Cultural, Tech and Recreation sectors was established, it invested in a
dedicated data and insights team.
That team embedded data thinking at the very start of every project.
In many cases, data and insights were captured that would otherwise have not
existed and were subsequently useful well beyond their original
purpose. That is the level of intentionality and investment
that is needed across government if the outcomes that this bill
sets out are to be achieved.
Here is what we are asking the committee to do.
That Stats NZ formally designate the creative sector as a harder
to measure community, requiring tailored data collection solutions,
and that this designation be written into the transition planning, not
left to discretion.
Secondly, that the outstanding classification issues with ANZSIC and ANZSOC codes
be resolved before the 2030 census transition.
Thirdly, that We Create's Data and Insights working group be formally recognized
as a co-design partner in the design of the Census Attribute
Survey.
Fourthly, that the single occupation limitation on IRD admin data be
addressed as part of the cross-government admin data improvement program.
And finally, that Stats NZ be required to track and publicly report on
creative sector data quality as part of the periodic review
obligations under the amended act.
In closing, the creative sector is one of Aotearoa's most dynamic economic
contributors and one of its least visible in official data.
We've been making this point to government for over a decade.
This bill is an opportunity to finally close that gap or to lock it in for
another generation. We are asking you to choose the former.
We're grateful for the opportunity to present to you today, and I'd welcome any
questions you might have.
Thank you, Paula, and particularly recognizing your sector.
It is huge and growing, and hopefully grows even more rapidly.
So thank you for a bit of a passionate plea about that. Any questions?
Got one from Camilla Village.
Thank you. We've heard from some other submitters who have concerns about the data,
similar to what you've raised in your submission, only for different sectors.
And I've just been wanting to follow through with them on what the impact of not
improving the data quality would be.
So my question for you really is, if these changes aren't made,
what is the impact likely to be for your sector?
It's stagnation in government policy development.
I can give you an example. We're still not counting digital exports
in this country, so the value of what the creative
sector is exporting isn't visible in government data.
When you're looking at what shapes our industry, we're still,
another example, if you're a game developer, you're a software
engineer. So we're not understanding where the work is happening, where
the workforces are,
or valuable things like
what's happening with exports. That leads to policy developments that
we're constantly having to go, "What about us?" in.
And being present in places where really the data should be telling the
story about where government policy and support should be
heading. As industry, we don't feel that we should have to
invest quite so much time in doing that to help government do its
job.
All right, good. I've got a question from Carl Bates.
Thanks very much, Chair. Thanks for the presentation, Paula, really
appreciated it.
You make a very strong argument around the data for your
sector. My question is, do you feel that that will
be more or less possible in the context of
the traditional census? Or do you think that an admin-first
approach with the additional focused
data collection for industries like yours could achieve that outcome?
I'm definitely in the and, and camp, not the either or.
I think there is way more we need to do with
securing good data in this country that lets us make informed decisions.
I'm not suggesting that that solely sits with government, but government obviously
has a key role in holding core data about
what's happening in the country and the economy as it relates to policy
development.
We have our own industry
who correlate their own data. You'll know from what
the committee's been looking at that getting data doesn't come
cheaply. So we've got industries with
small budgets trying to create their own data in the absence of government
data. What we need is that government has the core data, and that
anything the industry is doing is over and above that in an area that's of
particular interest to the industry.
The government having a solid base of core data, I think is the
important thing.
All right. Hey, thank you, Paula, for your contribution this afternoon.
Very interesting.
Thank you for having me.
Right. Now, we're going to Greater Wellington.
I see that we've got a few people on the line.
And
please come to-- Are you on your own here?
But we've got friends-
I am
... as well. We've got some on Zoom, have we?
Yeah.
You should have Darren.
Oh, she's something else. Okay. Are you on your own or-
Yes. Do you want to come up, Fiona, just in case?
Yes, please. Mm-hmm.
Fiona's one of our officers.
Yeah, good. Fantastic.
And we have Darren Potra chairing online. Yeah.
Online?
Yes.
Are they online? Not yet. But anyway, let's not hesitate.
If they come online, we'll happily join them.
All right. Thank you. Can I just ask a question whether the staff have got
this presentation? If not, I can just talk to it anyway.
Say that again.
Have the staff got a... Oh, no, he was going to put it online.
That's okay.
We have copies.
You have copies.
Oh, yeah. Do you want to hand them around? Yeah.
It's always a really good idea to have copies.
All right, fine.
Thank you.
But we have got your submission as well, so.
That's brilliant.
Yeah.
Thank you. And-
Fine. So just take it as read.
I'll take it as read.
And we're all fast readers here. Thank you. We can share even better.
No.
Because we're a collegial group up here.
Excellent.
Right, cool.
Great to hear.
All right, fantastic. Let's proceed.
All right. I'll introduce myself first. I'm Claire Johnston.
I'm a regional councilor, first term,
representing the Porirua, Tawa area, but this presentation is, of course,
on the whole region. Why are we presenting on this bill?
We're doing this because as an organization making evidence-based
investment decisions for our communities means that we have to
actually understand our data to make those decisions. It's pivotable.
Robust data matters.
We're responsible as a regional council for long-term network and
place-based planning across transport, land use,
infrastructure, emergency and hazard management, and of
course, for resilience.
We plan and invest over a 20 to 50 year timeframe,
and often for assets that will span across many generations.
Our decisions balance the growth, safety, equity,
and environmental protection, and should always be value for
money.
We're required by legislation to base our decisions on sound evidence and
robust data. As a councilor, I always expect
evidence and robust data.
Regional spatial planning and how we plan our region and how we consolidate
urban growth around existing growth corridors, how we pair
urban growth with economic development, how we stage growth over time,
all matter.
The bulk water supply is another issue.
How do we anticipate population growth with water supply
when we make these investment decisions?
Water, of course, is up for debate at the moment, but it's really important you
have consistent information and understand where your region's going.
Rural and urban flood protection, the level we
build at flood protection and schemes, is that one to 50
protection? Is it one to 500 protection?
Or do we
take into account, since January, I think we've had
72 incidents of national or district
emergency management issues.
Public transport is big for the Greater Wellington Regional Council.
It's probably the area that I get asked the most questions
about-We have to have really good
information, a really good understanding of our population and where our population
works, and where our population goes to school, and where they get
to.
So why does it matter to us? Why census?
GWRC combines the latest science with historical data,
current information, future forecasting.
We also have to understand the patterns.
We use these assessments to develop our policy to make the
investment decisions, land use planning, and as I said,
emergency planning.
We can't function on fragmented
population data.
Disaggregated and administrative data sets only work when
anchored to a strong, centrally collected national
population count.
I've personally watched, over the years,
data that isn't collected properly or it's inconsistent in its
collection. I've seen it particularly in economic data.
If you weaken the national collection,
it leaves regional councils carrying planning, emergency, fiscal,
and equity consequences without a reliable
evidence base.
Census data presents a single source of truth that we
and our communities and iwi can build and get behind
when we're making decisions.
Central population statistics are critical to regional
infrastructure.
They provide a single authoritative population baseline that we rely
on.
Decisions to invest in 30 to 100-year lifespans must be based on
good data.
Emergency management depends on that data.
Hazard management depends on it. So does statutory planning,
and legal defensibility is weakened if you don't have
evidence. The costs and the
responsibility could fall onto councils if we have no
solution. That concerns me because collecting data is
imperative. You can't have inconsistency.
You can't have one region collecting data one way and
one collecting it another. There must be consistency.
It also affects you as policymakers.
If you can't see the whole,
you risk fragmentation in your
own policy decisions.
So the bottom line for us is weakening national population
collection does not empower regions.
It fragments the system, it increases the risk, and it
undermines some of those critical infrastructural decisions.
We do support innovation, and the use of administrative data
needs to improve.
We acknowledge there have been problems with efficiency and
timeliness.
However, it's essential that the new model continues to provide accurate,
trusted, and sufficiently granular population data at
a regional, territorial, and community level, as well
as your national level.
To conclude, it comes down to the quality and detail of the data.
We're reminded that New Zealand does not have a great track record
in large-scale data projects.
The challenge to this select committee is to ensure that for the transition,
organizations like Greater Wellington will continue to have robust and
reliable data from which to make our decisions.
Flying blind in the future does not really bear
thinking about. We cannot do that.
Right. Mr. Ponter, do you want to say anything, or anyone else?
You're on mute, Darren.
Kia ora. Kia ora, Mr. Chair. Kia ora, members.
No, very eloquently presented by Councillor Johnson. Thank you.
I think the underlying thing here is that we are making billion-dollar decisions.
We're often doing that on a co-investment basis with the government.
And so the issues that Claire has put on the table with you
about reliable
data relates as much as anything else to our relationship with
our co-funding partner, which in most cases is the government.
Okay, cool.
Right. Members, questions?
Right. Camilla Village.
Thank you. Thanks both of you here, and Darren as well,
for your attendance and for your submission.
We did have a question in an earlier submission about
the use of data collected through rates,
and I just wanted to put it to you as the first council
that we've spoken to since then. What information do you get from
collecting rates, and what's the limitation on that in terms of the
overall
information that you can gain through-
I can make a comment on where I think the limitations are, but I'm going to let
Diana or Darren to speak to it.
Yeah. So, thank you, Camilla.
A rather unique situation for regional councils.
Most regional councils rate via the territorial authority.
So, you receive your... Well, if you're in Auckland, it's a different set of
circumstances altogether. But in this region, the
Kāpiti District Council, for example, rates for us
in the Kāpiti area. They get that
data. We don't generally interrogate
that data.
We wouldn't generally base large investment decisions like a
billion-dollar
water collection scheme, which is on the cards for us, we wouldn't
generally base that on rating information.
We would base that on census projections about how the population is
likely to change over the next 20 to 50 years.
All right. Hey, well, thank you for your submission.
Thank you for coming in person. That's always nice.
But comprehensive submission. Thank you.
Thank you very much.
Thank you.
And following on, and with that same vein, we're going to Local Government New
Zealand
They're on the line, you can see them? Yeah. Okay.
If you're there, we're looking forward to hearing from you, from local government.
Kia ora.
Hello, Fran. How are you going?
I'm well, thank you. Good to see you today.
So I'm here as Mayor of South Wairarapa,
with Palmerston North Mayor, Grant Smith, who I hope is also online somewhere.
Hey, so Fran, sorry to interrupt, we can't see you.
It's very, very blurry. So-
You can't s- how's that?
No, we can't see anything. We just see a blurry-
Okay
... something in front of your camera, I think.
My video is on.
That's weird. I can see you p- oh, you're right. It is blurry.
It's like something's-
I can see it
... in front of the camera. You're just about in-
No, my camera is completely free. Um-
Anyway
... and I don't, I can't... I'm not sure what's happened there.
Doesn't matter. We can hear you, for sure.
I don't want to get out of it and get in again because I won't get in again.
No.
So if it's okay, maybe I'll just talk.
I'm not sure-
Yes. Yeah, that's great
... why the camera is obscured, but I'm looking, doing it on my laptop
and there's nothing in front of it.
So, I'm here for Local Government New Zealand, and Grant Smith
also. So councils are now seeing their populations changing in
more diverse ways than we ever have in the last 50 years,
and to plan ahead, we need population stats about small
areas. For example, measures such as the Deprivation
Index, which is derived from the census and
provides mesh block data. Every council
is going to be affected differently by the growth in the elderly population, but
there are other trends impacting also.
For example, changes in farming practice, less dry stock, more
forestry, have had major population impacts in some rural
areas. And on the other hand, in urban areas, growth in
retirement villages or growing concentrations of
townhouses have driven changes in demand for services.
Although population projections provide reliable signals of things to
come, councils also need much more local knowledge.
Currently, there's just insufficient evidence that the use of the records
from government agencies, which will be dated, will give us the data we
need. Councils are in the front line in the provision of information and
managing public interest, but in an increasingly cost-con-
constrained environment with a rates cap looming.
We see this every day. For example, we're managing historical
underinvestment in infrastructure.
The cost of relocating this capital investment would be
prohibitive once it's established.
So we need to get as much data as possible, along the lines of what Greater
Wellington have just said. Regarding services, there's low political
tolerance of loss or reduction resulting from change in population
structure, and we don't want to be in a worse position than we are
now in forecasting future needs.
We're currently in a period of radical population change, and
after two failed censuses, local government needs
assurance that there's more behind this than third time lucky.
There've been increasing calls for the select committee to establish an independent
review of the proposals, and we support that.
Lastly, it's ironic that we're here today by accident rather
than being properly involved by Stats New Zealand.
As a significantly affected group, we'd expect to have had a high
level of engagement on such sweeping changes.
Local government should be seen by Stats NZ as a useful partner
with which they can work, even when planning a census.
We can provide local knowledge to enable robust decisions about
the resources required to do the job properly.
This didn't happen in 2018 or '23. There were
preventable mistakes, such as Haast being missed out completely
and Kawerau grossly undercounted.
Saving money by abandoning the census or not
undertaking it properly is just wrong, and future
planning will be seriously impacted by not having adequate, correct data
on which to base decisions.
Thank you, Andrew, Mr Chair. That's all for me, and-
Okay
... hopefully Grant will have a couple of comments, and then we've got questions if
you wish.
Grant, please.
Yes. Hi, Chair Andrew. Thanks,
Mayor Fran. Look, I think Fran has summed up all the detail
very well. But look, we understand the fiscal conditions are tight.
But a census is really, really fundamental to effective
decision-making. We're just going through our annual budget, and giving an example,
our Pasifika community, which is quite large with about sort of 6 to
7,000 people, came in and they do feel some of the
data around their sector isn't
as good as it could be. So,
abandoning a proper census would
possibly make that even worse.
Look,
we do think most Western countries have a form
of a census. It isn't the traditional
one survey type, but there are many different hybrids.
And we do think that if we don't do that, and the
independent evaluation panel said New Zealand wasn't ready to
move to the administration model.
So we do, from a position of knowing our local
communities really, really well, we're absolutely sensing this could
be an absolute disaster for future planning.
If there isn't a little bit of thought given to, and again, I understand the
fiscal requirements,
but putting back something in that census space, because
we've just seen how unreliable some of the
individual government departments and administrative
budgeting has been. I'll leave it at that. Ralph, have I missed anything?
Well, that sounds all good. Thanks, Grant.
All right, good. Thank you. Now, I've got a question from Todd Stevenson.
Thank you, and thank you both for your presentation.
And
disappointing, Fran, to hear that,
yeah, you weren't properly engaged in the-
Do you want me to wave my finger on your behalf, Fran?
Yeah. We can see you.
I can see you and hear you .
We can see you.
I'm just-
Yeah. I have a different question, though, because obviously, I think it is
important that local government is engaged with Stats New Zealand.
Has there been an engagement, because obviously local government holds a whole lot
of administrative data. Has there been any engagement, to your knowledge, with
Stats New Zealand about getting access to that administrative data?
Well, Ralph would have to answer on behalf of LGNZ, but certainly none in our
council and none that I know of.
No, I'm not aware of any engagement of Stats New Zealand with LGNZ.
All right. Well, that's it. Thank you.
Can I-- I might also, Mr. Chairman, answer Camilla's
previous question about rates data.
We can't use that for other reasons.
We'd love to be able to use our rates data and to be able to talk to our citizens
about all sorts of things, but you're actually not allowed to.
Okay.
And just to chime in from a city perspective.
We've had some real issues in the past with soldiers being
unaccounted for when they've been on deployment, and I'm talking thousands of
people.
We've had international students, and again, we have thousands of those, and
how they are properly counted. So just some of that population
database, it does become very, very difficult, and we just don't
seem to, to Todd, to answer your question properly, have all the dots really joined
up.
No.
Good. All right. Thank you, your worships, for your
contribution. Been very helpful and revealing, actually.
And no doubt we'll be asking some questions. Thank you for your time.
Very much.
Thank you.
Right. Now, we're going to Professor Kara, I hope.
Is that right?
Yeah. Nice to see you. Now, we've
got
10 minutes with you.
Oh, .
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Committee, for the opportunity to speak here on
behalf of Tangira, the Institute for Population Research at the
University of Waikato.
We certainly welcome the opportunity to comment on the Data and Statistics
Amendment Bill, and the associated Electoral
Amendment Bill, which together, as we have been hearing today,
fundamentally
shift the collection, analysis, use, and quality of population-level
information here in Aotearoa, New Zealand.
So really, unlike local government New Zealand,
Tangira, the Institute for Population Research, is a
trusted consultation partner of Stats New Zealand.
And we have been engaged along the ride
o-of the census modernization approach.
We
include Professor Tahuhaku Kutaia, who's an
internationally recognized expert in indigenous data sovereignty,
and who was involved, in fact, in the checking of the quality of the
administrative data sources when they were used to backfill
gaps in the 2018 census. We
also include Dr Jesse Whitehead, who was a member of the
expert independent panel on the census that we have also
heard about today. And myself, I'm a member of the
Pacific Data Sovereignty Committee, which has a memorandum of understanding
with Stats New Zealand and worked to support
Pacific representation and engagement in the previous
census. And I've also been a member of the Ethnicity
Data Standards expert advisory group.
So all of that engagement re-- means that Stats New Zealand
will not be surprised with the focus of our submission,
and that we strongly oppose this bill,
and really have significant concerns, expert
concerns,
about the implications and the risks associated with this bill.
I'm noting that our submission has been read by the committee.
I just wanted, really, the opportunity to speak today to a couple of
points that speak not only to the bill and the wording of the bill,
but actually also the wording of the regulatory impact statement
that accompanies the bill, noting that this is
described as an interim RIS, and that there would
have intended to have been a future RIS that described
further information that I think is really pertinent to this committee's
decision, but also to cabinet-related decisions.
And the first point really is, as we all know, the bill removes
the requirement for the five-yearly fully enumerated census of
population and dwellings. The text of the bill instead
requires the government statistician to publish in each financial year
statistics from a census of populations and dwellings.
I think it's really important to recognize how we are not meeting
the definition of a census, even in the wording of this bill.
And in fact, the RIS describes that one of the objectives is to
ensure an ongoing supply of population data
that meets international best practice and international standards.
But we are not meeting international standards or international b-best
practice of a census by using administrative data
in this model. We are not seeking full enumeration.
It is not sim-simultaneous. We cannot produce small area
statistics.
And all of these things are international requirements for a census.
I'm not entirely sure that even if this bill was to be enacted,
that the government statistician would be able to fulfill that
requirement.And it is
indeed attractive to have greater frequency of population statistics and
to be more efficient in the way that we use the administrative data that we
are collecting, and we are collecting more and more administrative data.
We here in Tangira, we're involved in establishing the IDI lab at the
University of Waikato, and we work on a number of projects using
administrative data.
But it's also important to understand those
contextual features, and indeed, the contextual features
associated with the sort of carrot of frequency of annual data
collection. While it may indeed be very possible to
collect and to link data
at one point in time and to start that on an annual
cycle from 2030, it's not necessarily
when that data has been collected.
Might be linked at that time, but that data might have been collected some time
ago. And the longer and longer we get away from a population
census, the more we don't understand actually about
the accuracy of that data and the timing of that data collected.
So frequency is not really potentially all that it's cracked up to be.
I also wanted to specifically point to another reason why this new model
is being proposed. As described in the RISZ and in other Stats
NZ documentation and in many consultation engagements we've
been involved in,
it's described that this responds to the emerging data needs of key
population groups and also responds to the ability of our
administrative data
to provide key census variables. In this
documentation, the key population groups that are described include
Māori, Pacific, rainbow communities, families, those
living in specific geographic locations, those experiencing
disability, those experiencing homelessness.
Key variables described include detailed ethnicity,
multi-ethnicity, languages spoken, housing
quality. But actually, all of these variables are really the
ones that will not be replaceable within the
administrative data. These populations are the ones that will
have differential missingness. Differential missingness that we
know will result in differential targets and
differential policy provision, which will have
outcomes for those populations and for Aotearoa society
as a whole. As we know, exacerbated inequities are enormously
costly for us as a society. And then finally, on
that issue of cost, one of the solutions proposed to these
critical and differential failings of administrative data
include the census attribute survey that we've been hearing about
and ensuring that there are tailored solutions for key
populations groups. I think it's really important to
understand that we don't know enough about these solutions
in order to let this bill proceed. We
don't know the size of that survey.
The size of the survey that's been proposed has already been
reduced from 5% to 3%. We don't know that mode.
I think it might be an online survey, which again, will provide
quite differential quality.
We don't know the sampling frame. Without a census, you don't have that
population understanding on which to draw your sample from.
And most importantly, we don't know the costs of this census.
We also don't know the costs that are required across government to
improve administrative data, and we haven't had any assessment of the
enormous costs of doing this wrong.
So therefore, we strongly oppose this bill, and we support the need
for an independent review. We support the need to consider a
population register and a dwelling register in Aotearoa in order to
improve these baseline understandings of our population before we
even think about such transitions.
And we support the need for a continued actual full
enumeration census in the meantime, so that we don't make
costly decisions that have a differential impact.
Kia ora.
Thank you very much. Now,
any questions? Look, we've heard many of the points
before. It's not to say that they're not valuable, but thank you very much for your
paper and
just reiterating those points today. Thank you.
Kia ora.
Right. Now we're going to New Zealand Council for Civil
Liberties. Yeah, cool. Lovely.
Now we've got 10 minutes with you.
Great. Tēnā koutou. My name is Stephen Ensor.
I am the deputy chair for the Council for Civil Liberties, and I am perhaps
foolishly going to depart from my prepared remarks to be more in
conversation with things that other people have said.
Cool.
First, the council would like to tell the committee that
Statistics New Zealand is the government agency that engages with us
most effectively.
We meet with them regularly. They are quite open and friendly and
speak openly with us about important things, and we wish that other
agencies, primarily Corrections, would be vastly more
open in answering to our concerns.
So we'd like to thank them for that.
Good to hear.
The council's message for you, for this committee, for Parliament is simple.
We can and should conduct a full enumeration survey census
in 2028.
The narrative that we've heard
from Statistics New Zealand and the minister, that we have to do away with the
census, that it's too expensive,
and that they have a new approach. We do not have
confidence
that the new approach is ready, and we do not believe that the case has been
made that we need to abandon the approach that we have been
using. The council cares deeply about the census and about our
democracy because we believe that those are foundations for having civil
liberties.We're not alone in that belief.
We cited that the Committee for the Elimination of Racial Discrimination's
comments in our written submission.
We believe that every one of the human rights committees will have the same thing
to say,
that if we are intentionally reducing the quality of the data that we are
collecting,
we should expect the outcomes that we are producing to decline
in step with that.
These bills do not merely
reduce the quality of the civil liberties and the freedoms that people will be
encouraging. They are going to reduce the quality of every last government
service.
The data that we require to make government decisions
comes from the census, and if we reduce the quality of that data,
then the government will inevitably make less good decisions.
Finally,
these bills are doing more than removing essential government
supports.
We have been systematically dismantling safeguards designed to
prevent mass surveillance.
The council has been working for some time with Statistics New Zealand about
the IDI. We are opposed to the way that the IDI
operates.
We
believe that the new ISDS is a technically superior system, and it
has better safeguards. But the whole process is not one
that we believe in. We believe that the government should not be
combining data from all of its administrative systems into one system
to give it a panopticon view of every individual's life.
What would it do instead?
What we did before.
Every ministry takes care of its own information.
Right.
The administrative data is collected for a single purpose, right?
That's in its definition, and it is fit for that purpose.
And when you start combining data from different sources that were collected for
different purposes,
you start
introducing all kinds of operational and civil liberties risks.
Okay.
Finally,
it was just mentioned, the population registry was just mentioned.
The council is opposed to a population register for the
same reasons that we just talked about, about the IDI.
And we also
would like to reiterate our call for an independent review
to be commissioned on the proposals.
There is a lot of detail in our written submission-
No, that's-
We hope you have some questions.
I've got a question from Rima Nunkeley.
Thanks, Mr. Chair.
You just said that collecting data from different
government sources, admin sources,
poses civil liberties risks. Can you give, for our audience, an
example of
one or more of those risks that you can think of, that come to your head?
So the primary risks are outcomes of
surveillance. Right? The more the government knows about you, the
more that it's possible to
single you out and
interact with you based on
specific information.
Right? The
...
Yeah, I've stuck my foot in it now. This whole system we have for
controlling government information flows stems from controls that were enacted
after the Second World War to prevent our governments from being able to do
the things that Nazi Germany did.
Okay, thank you.
Can I supplement you, if I can, Mr. Chair?
Okay.
Thanks for that, but the information already
exists. So how do you
foresee the
risk happening if the information is already there?
And I can understand there's a lot of people that have those concerns.
I get those concerns sometimes as well.
There is a difference between having the information there
potentially and having the information there in a format that's ready to use.
All right. Now I've got a question from Todd Stevenson.
Thanks. I think there's probably a lot more we could do about
the visibility to citizens about the data the government holds.
So I agree with you on that point. But interested, and actually totally something
that no one else has recommended. Your recommendation five, and
actually we heard earlier that around 500 people
after a census are
charged or whatever fine for not doing it.
And yours is a point around changing the onus, I'm assuming, for
those prosecutions?
Fundamentally, we don't think that forcing people to answer
government surveys is going to result in better data quality.
And so
our whole perspective on the issue is that
if people aren't going to voluntarily provide the
information, that
coercive tactics are not appropriate.
Right. So you're recommending that we make a change to the, yeah, basically the
onus of proof.
Yeah.
But your point has got to be a willingness rather than a requirement.
There is a risk that if we just force everyone to provide an answer, that the
quality of the answers we get starts declining.
Yeah.
All right. Pete, thank you for your contribution, and thank you for waiting
patiently.
Thank you.
Now, I'm
hoping Alan Keegan is here, and I thought that was you.
I've read your name before. So do you want to come to the front
here?
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Now we've got
five minutes with you.
Okay. So my name is Alan Keegan.
Yeah.
I'm a statistician that's worked in the public sector for about 15 years.
With respect to all of the people that already presented, they've told you
about data quality, social license, all those
sorts of things. But I think if that really mattered, none of us would be here
today. People have been saying this-For the Data and
Statistics Act Bill 2022. They've said it for the census
reviews.
Some of the people who have spoken today
were selected by the government to give advice on those, or to chair
those, or be involved with those. But
so I'm not convinced that
data and evidence is going to persuade you.
So the only thing that's left is to actually just
tell you that it's not in your own personal self-interest as
ambitious politicians. Most of you are
fairly new to Parliament, elected in 2023 or later.
It's just,
really,
are you sure you want to do this?
Is what I'm saying.
Hang on. Where did that
go?
We're
not in a benign statistical environment anymore.
The statistics portfolio is not just
a
nice training wheels portfolio for new up-and-coming
ministers or a signal from the Prime Minister that you're on a
performance improvement plan.
The statistics portfolio is going to make or break your career in the future, I
think.
So this is what you're signing up for.
I'm giving you some real-life examples of how administrative data
doesn't always tell you the truth about the world.
So, in the 1980s, millions of children disappeared
overnight in the United States,
not because there was a massive abduction of children, but
because the Inland Revenue Service required
parents to add their children's Social Security
numbers to their tax returns.
Here in New Zealand in the 1990s,
the Māori mortality rates jumped,
not because there was a massive reduction in their health,
but because ethnicity was started to be required
on death certificates.
A more personal example, when I worked for the Ministry of Health, I
was looking at costing data
for hospital procedures.
I personally saw data where, for
the most lengthy and complex orthopedic
operations with metal implants,
for some DHBs, according to their systems,
those implants cost $0.10 each.
And in terms of-
Why would they only cost $0.10?
They didn't.
They cost hundreds or thousands of dollars.
Yeah, I know, but why did they make them $0.10?
Because the
way that the data attributes it.
For those that you might be familiar,
the analysis was for what they call purchase units.
Yeah.
And do you attribute... Well,
I'll use something like basic supplies,
like bandages, Panadol, what have you.
How do you attribute that to the patient, or to the ward, or to the
days?
Yeah, cool.
Yeah.
That's the
reason. And
in terms of your
own personal self-interests as ambitious politicians,
who, you want to
get reelected this year, I think.
You want to make it into
cabinet.
The census is the backbone
of one of the resources at your disposal that
hasn't been carved off exclusively by the executive.
You're surrendering what little control that you have over the
data and advice that you're given, that you get given from public
servants like me,
to the hands of
generic middle managers who aren't
statistically literate,
or the ones that don't understand how the system works.
The ones that don't understand, for example, that you're counted as employed if
you work only one hour per week, or that house prices aren't included
in the consumer price index.
And
the alternative to having
a
high-quality census and a high-quality infrastructure around it is
that
your ability to
service your electorates, your communities, is going to be impacted.
Do you think a first-term backbencher is going to
be able to afford, in their budget, lots of data
scientists and consultants to get information
when, for example,
if you're trying to advocate for your kōhangatanga in
the South Island, when your electorate is bigger than the South Island,
do you want to have the more...
I'm not saying this is going to happen, but I'm talking about the general
direction. Do you want
something like the infamous Chinese-sounding surnames for
house purchasers to be the highest quality of
information that you can get?
So
yeah. It's
appeal to your own naked self-interest.
Are you sure you want to do this? Are you really sure?
That's what I'm going to-I don't think any--
If the
high-quality submissions here were going to persuade you,
the bill never would have made it onto the order paper.
Yeah. Right. Hazel, thank you.
Now, any questions?
Don't think so. That is not to say we haven't listened to you.
Yeah.
So-
I think I'm going to just say this. I think you have personal ambitions to be
more than a rubber stamp, right?
Yeah. All right. Thank you very much. Thanks, Alan.
Right. Now, we're going to Tigger Wills on Zoom.
Is that right?
Tigger, are you there?
Yes. Sorry, hopefully you can hear me.
Yeah, we can.
Excellent. Okay. Just grappling with the settings.
Okay. So here we are.
Good.
Right. Okay.
You ready?
Mm-hmm. Yes.
Okay.
Sorry, okay. Around 1990, I was in the UK
working as a lead developer on a national registration system
for a variety of diverse potential clients, whose populations
ranged from a few hundred thousand, for example, Malta and Barbados,
to hundreds of millions, the former Soviet Union, then known as the Commonwealth of
Independent States, or the CIS. And as part of that development,
for test and demonstration purposes, I created a rudimentary database of
10 million individuals apparently living in family groups, et cetera.
As a consequence of this work in particular, and subsequent roles,
including with national health networks and
iGov, our precursor to Real Me, I have an
uncommon insight into the many aspects of individuals'
information,
an emphatic appreciation of its diversity and sensitivity
necessary to embrace it.
My own hypothetical population was entirely fictitious and
intended merely for testing and demonstration of the system,
drawing upon my imagined individuals' existence.
That is how I see the information drifting should the periodic
complete reset be evaded to save costs.
The ideology of homogeneity in the population,
repeatedly expressed by some, most vocally by David
Seymour, is exactly that, an ideology.
We are all different, and each one of us are valid
individuals deserving of recognition.
The statistical projection of chronologically
degrading information, occasionally freshened by some survey
group, the provenance of which is at the mercy of those in power,
cannot reflect the true nature of the dynamic population.
Those who are not conveniently close to the perceived profile
will neither have representation nor awareness that they are
invisible and overlooked.
Even should their disappearance become apparent, how might it be
rectified? Those
likely disparate individuals can shout as loud as they like,
assuming they have that capacity, but being heard may be
impossible with an entrenched system
to which they are alien. More and more, the population will be expected
to live as though they are within the ideological range of
existence permitted by the population model.
I represent,
on a few directional
vectors, if you like,
minorities who are at risk
of omission by the
normalized expectations of which
would come into force should the census be lost.
Are you there? Have you-
I am there. Yes.
Have you finished or...?
I have finished that presentation.
I
wasn't entirely sure exactly how long it would take, but-
Okay. Very good
... yes.
Hey, thank you.
Any questions? So your proposition, just to
encapsulate it, I think,
is that
with the removal of census, it becomes much more difficult to
get detailed information on us minority
groups. Am I right in saying that?
Yes, indeed. I believe the minority groups stand a very increasing
risk of-
Yeah
... just being lost in the noise
of the homogeneity-
Okay
... which is the biggest-
In the first part of your submission, you talked about the entire
project.
Was that something you're recommending that Stats look at, or are you just saying
that that is a possibility?
Sorry, I don't follow your question.
Well, in the census, you talk about it too offering immense
wealth of data regarding a snapshot of the entire national
population.
Right.
So was that a technology you were suggesting that Stats
might employ or just something conceptually?
Well, as I understand it, the census is the basis which
is
effectively entirely refreshed every time we have a census-
All right
... and becomes a wealth of source of information.
All right. Hey, thank you very much for your submission.
Thank you very much indeed.
Cool.
Thank you.
Right. Now, we're going to the Blind
Citizens submission that we missed just before lunch.
Is that you, Rose?
We can't quite hear you
Thank you. Yes, it is Rose.
Yeah.
And Jonathan has just joined us.
Good.
So
thank you for the opportunity and for the perseverance behind the scenes to resolve
the-
No, that's all right. It's good that you've come back.
Perfect. Okay. So I'll just start off.
I'm not sure, sometimes it's helpful for Jonathan to actually know who's present.
Right. So-
Whether that's possible very quickly-
Yeah
... that would be great, thank you.
Well, there's a normal representation of the committee.
So we've got a mixture of-
Okay
... opposition government members.
So, there's seven of us, I think,
hearing your submission today.
All right. Thank you. I can update Jonathan later.
So first of all, I'll just start off, and then I will be handing over to Jonathan.
But we'd just like to make the point that there is really good
cooperation working with Stats NZ officials in the current
environment, and there are some great champions within Stats NZ.
However, it's commitments that we need, and what we are
going to do is refer to Jonathan's personal submission, which
Blind Citizens New Zealand does endorse.
But much has been shared by earlier submitters.
Our view is that the bill's justification remains incomplete
without evidence that the proposed model can maintain or improve
data quality. So Jonathan, I'll hand over to you now to
speak in more detail about the points that we
really want to bring home.
Yeah.
Beauty. So hopefully I'm heard.
Yes, you are.
Beauty. Lovely. Look, I think the important thing for us to note as an
organization representing blind and low vision people
across the country is that the proposed
move actually is a two-edged sword.
A move to a census attribute survey type environment
will put less burden on blind and low vision people because they will be
seen, and need to engage less frequently,
and the experiences that they have when an interaction is
required will be handled in a more
accommodating fashion.
But this is actually only guaranteed
if we take the notion of making what is called reasonable
accommodation,
if we take that from a moral obligation
and make it a legal imperative.
So we need to see that that becomes
the minimum standard for the way that Stats NZ
officials will work with blind, low vision, and for that matter,
other disabled people as well.
On the other hand, so that's the good experience, on the other hand, the
admin data space is a potential minefield.
The quality of data that ends up in the system
that is not directly supplied by
or verified by a blind or low vision person
is going to be questionable.
And I'm going to give you a real concrete example.
I have two NHI numbers today.
I have the one for the bulk of my life, and I have the one
when the emergency department staff muffed the form,
and I am unable to correct that.
What is further staggering about admin data is that because
I don't interact with the health system
for needs
explicitly relating to my blindness,
you can't tell that I'm blind.
Not from admin data, because all of those records that
say that I'm blind predate everything digital.
So, admin data for blind people is likely to be of
poorer quality
than the average citizen.
We've got no protections in law
putting an obligation on government agencies to ensure the
data they hold about us
is in fact, fact.
Furthermore, even if there was a legal imperative, the ability
of blind and low vision people to do that for themselves
is
doubtful,
probably heading towards negligible.
So the admin data for our community
is almost certainly of a much lower
grade than what we see from census data
today.
Rose has pointed out that we do have a good working relationship with Stats NZ,
but blind, low vision, and other disabled people need that
commitment enshrined in law
so that it cannot be lost with the flick of an
official's pen, like was a disability
survey with ministerial sign-off in
2018.
The United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disability
is our reference document.
It's what government signed up to in 2008.
But far too often, the energy of organizations like
ours is spent educating government officials
on what that government commitment
means and the obligations it places on
agencies to do the right things for and
with disabled people.Articles 9,
all about accessibility,
and 31 on data are specifically relevant to us.
The first, Article 9, is all about the way individuals can
interact with systems.
But even if you change it for this bill,
it will only apply to the interactions we have with Stats NZ.
It's the interactions with the other agencies that remain
doubtful.
Article 31 of the convention is all about the
obligation on the state party,
that's you,
to ensure that meaningful data is available,
disaggregated by disability status.
I've ended up with the specific recommendations in
my personal submission
that
could've
been copied in, but you then would have to read them twice, into the Blind Citizens
NZ submission. Thank you for your time.
Love questions.
Right. Thank you very much to both of you.
Pretty straightforward, I think.
Yeah. Just take us back, what happened
with the disabilities in 2018? Are you saying literally-
Courtesy of a budget decision reached without
parliamentary oversight, the scheduled New Zealand Disability Survey
was axed in favor of Te Kupenga.
Right. Okay.
Disabled people were put in competition with Maori.
Okay.
We lost in 2018, they lost in 2023.
Right. I've got a question from Rima Nakley.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Jonathan, more of a
proposition rather than a question.
With respect to your NHS number,
I'm very happy to help your local member of parliament try and fix that up for you,
if you like.
There you are.
Very happy to.
Thank you, but it's currently sitting as a lovely demonstration of the
inadequacies of admin data.
Can try and sort it out though.
It's not hurting me.
It's also a great example of a receptive local MP.
Oh, I know I've got one of those.
Yeah, good. Hey, thank you, Dr. Godfrey and Rose for your
contribution today. That was very good.
Thanks, my mate.
Okay.
Thanks.
Kia ora.
Thank you.
Thank you. We're going to Godfrey Bridger, who's coming in via
Zoom, hopefully.
Where's the option to leave?
You can't leave.
Right.
Mr. Bridger, are you there?
Right. Where are we?
Oh, hi. Can you hear me now? I'll start my video.
We can.
Nice to hear from you.
Good. Well, thank you very much for having me.
This, I believe, is one of the most important
functions of government, the select committee, so I think this is a
very important perspective,
very important role that you have to do.
Look, I'm going to try and break my presentation into
roughly a half or two thirds and a third.
The last one is about my operational experience as a
census manager for Hamilton and Waikato,
and how it relates to the first. And the first is,
really,
I started very positively to make positive
contributions and say, "Yes, we must try and do better.
We must do more with less." And that is
absolutely always a fact of life for whatever you do in government, whatever
we do in our daily lives or institutions.
So,
improving is the name of the game, and I'm very strongly behind
that. But having said that,
look, I have now analyzed the submissions, and I've even got
AI to help me to do that, and it seems that
there are very deep concerns about data quality.
And the fact is that statistics is
a fundamental foundation
of policy,
good policy for the future, as many people have mentioned.
So,
I have changed my view and
think that an inquiry is required, or a review, or
a formal review because this is so important to the country
that it really does that. However, now I'll move on to,
if it's going to happen,
what could be done better? Now, I had seven recommendations,
and
most of them have been raised already.
So I'm only going to concentrate on the two that have not been
raised, I understand.
Sorry, one of them was raised, but I just want to reinforce it
that a commitment from the CEOs at top
level is really important.
And if you're going to get
that sort of commitment to get data quality, you
must get CEOs of those different organizations
to commit very strongly. Now, the ones that
are unique of
my presentation is that I'm suggesting as a strong
motivator, you should be
providing a reward in the
currency you areWorking in. That
is data. So when people have to give
data or are inclined to give data, give them a
reward of data that's relevant to them.
It'll cost a bit more, but I believe it'll do
a ) statistics quality gathering,
be a positive factor, but b ] it'll also help government as a
whole, because government is losing the trust of people, and
there's plenty of reports to do that, and that's again across the world, not
just New Zealand, but we've suffered from that too.
So, that was one thing that I have recommended that no
one else has. The other
one was a little bit more controversial, and that is that
before
money is transferred, money or services or grants
transferred from government
to bodies that need it, people that need it, organizations that need it,
whatever it is,
you get some sort of commitment that they provide
you information of useful quality.
And again,
it's a two-way... We live in a world that's always a two-way street.
Relationships are very, very important.
Now, the final point I'd come to in my census
experience comes to this business of community.
We have lost a lot of the sense of community
in the world and in New Zealand. And I
think a lack of a census is going to strengthen
that loss, not-
Yeah
... weaken it, not mitigate it.
And so just to give you a little example from my
census, I had at the peak just under 200 people, that's
not current turning turnover, reporting indirectly to me through about
24 people reporting to me directly.
They were a wonderful team. And I want to point out and emphasize,
I didn't understand how Primewell said census was a failure in
2023. To me, it was not. We got
92% return rate, something very high,
which was in line with past good ones. 2018 was really bad.
But anyhow, coming back to this community issue,
my staff
just bought in so strongly to
collecting
data, they felt really committed to what they were doing.
They
did their best, and one of the measures, for example, that we'd been given
guidelines was,
go back, if you can't get data the first time, please go and knock on the door a
second and a third and maybe a fourth.
Well, my record in my group was eight.
And I
didn't
set a limit because I began
to trust these people, and these people showed
how important it was
for the personal contact.
And we all know this. This works very, very well.
This Zoom works very, very well, but nothing beats personal contact.
And so anything that helps personal contact, and
here's another point, we're losing community, we're losing personal
contact, so there's another cautionary note
about dropping a census for that reason, because it also
helps, I believe,
government to understand and people to understand what government is and
how... It's a very dry subject, but boy,
do people understand how important it is.
So that's my message is please take
this very, very seriously, more seriously than I submitted
it in my positive proposal.
And I've moved a bit against rushing
off and dropping census. I do understand because it's very, very expensive.
It cost
238 million last time, but about 40 million of that
was because of the Gabriel
weather thing. And
even still, 180 or 190 million sounds far too much.
But I think it does more and is more important than people
realize. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Right. Thank you very much for that.
And, you're right, two suggestions around accountability
is very welcome.
Mm-hmm.
Members have put in suggestions.
It's good. Thank you.
And great to hear of the diligence of the team
in pursuing and trying to get accurate information.
It's good to hear that personal story.
Hey, so thank you for joining us this afternoon.
We'll certainly consider those two
unique proposals you put forward in your paper, so thank you very much.
Cheers. Thank you.
Right. Now, Research Association of New Zealand.
Now we've got 10 minutes with you.
I presume it's Mr. Mills and Ms. Turner.
Is that right? Thank you.
Correct.
Oh. The floor is yours.
Good afternoon, Chair Bailey, and thank you members of the committee for your time.
We appear on behalf of the Research Association of New Zealand.
We represent the market research companies in New Zealand, along with our clients,
both internally within
commercial and government research insights teams, but also the public and
private organizations that use our data to make decisions on a day-to-day
basis.
Population data is core to what we do every day.
It's
the basis of all the decisions we make in terms of research design
and the recommendations we give out the back.
And we want to be upfront with our concerns fromFrom the start.
We're not here to defend the status quo.
The 2023 and 2018 censuses, we all
know had issues.
But we don't think that those issues are best served and
fixed by the solutions that are put by this bill.
Declining participation is a genuine challenge. We see it in our members' work.
We've been dealing with it for over 20 years, and we've found ways of dealing with
it that are useful.
We also agree that administrative data is a real and underused asset in New
Zealand, and we think it should be used more, but in the right
contexts.
So the question we're putting to the committee is not whether the change is needed,
but whether this particular change at this particular pace will produce better
population statistics or worse ones, and we argue that the current
bill will produce the latter.
We've got two specific concerns and we've outlined those in our submission.
We want to draw some examples of those today and also provide some
solutions. The biggest area of concern for us, and you've heard from
a number of submitters today, is around small area data.
Port Waikato, for example. If you start looking at 5% of the population
there and base your decisions on 5% of Port Waikato,
you might be coming up with some interesting-
Never heard of the place
Never heard of the place. Well, exactly.
Every decision that shapes daily life at a local level, where to build a school,
how to grow your business, what health resources are needed, depends on
knowing with precision where those people are and where they live.
That 5% annual survey cannot consistently deliver that.
Stats NZ's own regulatory impact statement say so.
It acknowledges in its language, reductions in data accuracy, detail,
and coverage, particularly in small populations and in local
areas. That's not our characterization of the bill.
That's Stats NZ's characterization of its own proposal.
The communities most exposed to these problems are also the ones least able to
compensate for it.
Iwi governance bodies making resource decisions, as you've heard, Pacific Health
funders looking for funding and defensible numbers, a business owner needing to
build a robust market estimate to get funding, all will struggle
with this new regime.
There are technical tools that can be used to help this.
We can use over-sampling, we can use booster samples, we can use multi-year
pooling, but they need to be mandated in the legislation.
And they need to be resourced sufficiently to make sure that they're delivered
consistently and within a similar framework right through.
At the moment, the bill does not require any of this, and we'd like to work with
the committee on what a specific amendment to address small area data adequacy
could look like. Our second concern is the transition
timeline. The bill proposes to make administrative data the primary source of
population statistics. You'd think after 30 years, I'd get
that word right. Mandatory from
2030, and that's just four years from now.
The Nordic countries are the standard that is used as a reference point for this
kind of reform, and it's a fair one.
They've done it very, very well and their systems work.
What the comparison doesn't mention is that they've been doing this for 50 years,
and they started developing their registers, their population registers back in
1967.
Denmark, Norway, and Finland made equivalent investments over similar time
horizons. These are not systems created by
legislation and goodwill. They are the product of
five or more decades of sustained institutional investment, consistent
data governance, and legal frameworks that require uniform recording standards
across all public agencies, and we definitely don't have that at the moment.
New Zealand's data sets are not there.
Different agencies collect different data using different definitions, different
update schedules, and different coverage standards.
The result is a fragmented picture of the population, and one that's
even thinner for the communities that interact least with government systems.
Stats NZ's own regulatory impact statement implicitly acknowledges this.
It concedes early year reductions in coverage and
accuracy, which we take as a careful way of saying the system
will not be ready by 2030 to produce the quality of statistics that
it's currently replacing.
You've only got to look at the complexity of something like Te Whatu Ora has
faced in getting its own systems to align internally.
Now multiply that across every government agency and you understand the scale of
what's being proposed. We're not saying we can't get there.
We're saying four years is not long enough.
And it's not responsible to retire the traditional census before the alternative
is demonstrably ready to replace it.
The transition should be contingent on the infrastructure
actually being ready, not on a calendar date that's been set.
We have a number of skills available within our own member base that we'd like
to
offer as use, and we've already started engaging with Stats NZ on
that. We have a direct experience in survey design and response rate recovery and
community engagement, and we have access to international evidence bases as
well on what works in addressing participation decline,
through our connections with international industry associations.
We're offering to participate in whatever independent review or co-design process
follows this committee's work as practical technical contributors.
We want to leave the committee with three specific tests, each of which could be
addressed by an amendment. One is the local
reliability standard, the second is the data readiness test, and the
third is the community participation standard.
These are all things we think would add value to what is being proposed.
The local reliability standard would require that minimum standards for small
area data adequacy, including over-sampling and booster
sample, provisions within the population that are
defined, resourced, and independently verified before the
administrative data model is used as the primary census.
The data readiness test would require that benchmarks for administrative data
infrastructure readiness are defined and independently verified before the
traditional census is retired.The transition could be triggered by
demonstrated readiness and not by a fixed date.
And finally, the community participation standard would require a funded public
participation strategy, not a communications plan, but a genuine behavior
change program to be independently designed, resourced, and
evaluated before the transition periods.
New Zealand has done it before and we've done it really well.
We think we can do it again with the census.
Management of future pandemic and biosecurity risks are examples of when this
buy-in and the data that it contributes will be vital.
The same approach applied to census participation with proper resourcing and
genuine community partnership could reverse the declining response rates
and give us the quality of data that we deserve.
If these three tests are in the legislation, our position changes
noticeably.
We're not opposed to this reform succeeding.
We want it to succeed on terms
that will actually serve New Zealand as well, and delivers data that can inform
decisions that help us to succeed. Thank you for your time.
We'll take any questions.
Hey, thank you very much. Very good submission.
Oh, just to say, yeah, so obviously those three tests,
yeah, maybe if you've got anything you want to provide to us additionally, that
would be great.
Yes, we can send those through.
Yeah. Because that
sounds... So it's basically like a gateway before we rely totally on administrative
data.
And some really clear testing of the systems before we put it in place-
Yeah
... rather than jumping straight in. Thanks.
Also, your suggestions in-
Mm
... section seven of your submission I thought were-
Helpful
... very helpful.
Thank you.
And this issue around making sure the quality of any
admin data in its current form and what might be
captured or should be captured in the future is crucial.
We've just heard Mr. Bridger talking about making CEOs
accountable. But also,
how would you
go about
doing that? Do you
rely on stats to undertake that role and provide
feedback, or do you think it needs to be independent, so if
people have to deliver bad news they're not compromised, they're independent to
express them?
We deliver bad news all the time. An
independent oversight would be useful.
The key is having consistent
ways of measuring things across everywhere.
If you look at the councils, for example,
and how you measure
what a house is in a different council, they vary.
And the data quality on that varies quite considerably.
According to Auckland Council, I live in a four-bedroom house.
I'm still trying to find the fourth bedroom,
and I'm short one toilet. I've tried to get that changed,
but it's not important to them. That information, when it's aggregated, goes into
planning.
So, if you multiply that up by the number of houses in New Zealand, you can see the
problem.
Yeah.
Okay. Carmela?
So final question. Just in relation to the part five of your
submission, you would've heard, if you read any of the other submissions,
a similar call for an independent review.
You put in some information about some international
examples where there have been reviews.
What, in your view, would a New Zealand
equivalent review look like?
I think a key element that's got to cover a really broad range of
stakeholders. I think this process has highlighted
the range of interested parties,
and the uses of data that even we weren't aware of.
The range of submitters has definitely highlighted that.
It needs technical expertise in there as well.
And it needs, I think, a cross-party approach.
This is data that will outdate all of us.
And so this is something that has to sit out for 20 or 30 years.
The value of data is not just now, it's the trends that it creates in the long
term.
Thank you.
Right. Thank you very much for your submission. Very helpful.
Right. Sam, I see you sitting there.
We've got two submissions, and we know who you are.
Oh, yes.
And so nice to see you again.
Same to you.
And we will be seeing you shortly, as I said.
But anyway, we've got your submission.
Mm.
Floor is yours. Five minutes, I think.
10.
Oh, you're very careful because you... Yes. Right.
Yeah. So, Isombart Productions is concerned with the
Census Bill. Now, we haven't put a position whether it's for or against.
We're wanting to make sure that it's robust and have safeguards in place
so that there are steps in place for data corrective measures.
And our biggest concern is the Maori electoral population.
Considering I'm in my 30s right now, my Maori friends are
having bigger families than my non-Maori friends.
So that's something that I've noticed that's been evident.
That's also come up between the two last census, that the Maori
population has gone up by 3%, or the population that have
identified has gone up. The other concern, this was
discussed after we submitted it, but is the 2028
planned census.
Our biggest concern is the fact that we are borderline
on eight Maori electorates in the country, and we
want to make sure with the new proposed boundaries that go on for the next
election,
every Maori electorate MP has 5,000 more constituents
than their North Island counterpart.
And that itself is already quite on a dicey line,
and that could be entrenched for two elections, and we're concerned that
that is going to put a lot of stress on those MPs who already themselves are
covering quite some geographically large areas including,
was it Te Tai Tonga being the biggest one.
Now, on a more personal note, I'm one who's only
ever done an electronic census in my life as an adult,
including-The census place lost my
2013 electronic census. However, they managed to get my landline
number that they only would've got from that census to ring me to say it was
missing.
So I think that is something that can be a bit of a laugh considering in
the previous census, I was in
the 04 telephone call area, not the 06.
So that's something on there.
You have a landline. That's shocking.
At that point.
Oh.
Just checking.
Yeah. Yeah,
at that point.
So that's something that
was quite intriguing, that happening.
And also,
on data matching, this was something I was warned when I was on the unemployment
benefit. "Be careful you get paid fortnightly because Work and Income only has
48 weeks in a year because they can't comprehend five," was it three,
"fortnights happening in one month." And so that's data
collection going wrong. And often anyone who's been on the benefit, Work and
Income's right. The beneficiary's always wrong.
Even when the Commissioner of the IRD backs the beneficiary over Work and
Income over the wrongly established debt.
So that is something with administrative data, mistakes can happen, and it
depends who's inputting data, who collects the data.
And so we want to make sure that
we keep some record or a fail-safe that goes back so we can at least get our
population records accurate or adjusted,
especially when administrative anomalies come up, so that we
at least have some sort of way of correcting the data.
So at least we still have accurate things to do planning.
We, for instance, Ballot uses it not for general elections, but local body
elections. We
have to look at data to find out where's the right place to run our shows.
Whakatane District Council's quite an interesting one because Murupara
doesn't belong anywhere with itself in there,
and
but trying to work out for that particular council to Maori and general
ward, where was the biggest population center, and where was the one that would
bring in the best in-studio audience?
So that's something we like to do, and yeah, I'm glad we're one
organization that has put that place on the map.
Yeah.
Right. Do I take it you've finished?
Oh, for this submission, yes.
We're poised for your next one, too.
Right. Members, any questions?
Yes. A reference to Harry Styles.
Yeah.
Stacy did that one, not me.
From Mr. Carl Bates.
Thanks, Mr. Chair. Just in regards to the census in
2028 and the impact on the 2029 election,
my understanding is that the 2028
census will not happen in time, even under the old model,
to ensure boundary changes are in place
for the 2029 election. There's been a
few submitters that have raised that today, and I just wanted to
see if that's your understanding or what your understanding is of the timing
from the census to then do the boundaries review,
in order for them to be ready for that
2029 election. My understanding is that that timeframe, it's not
possible anyway.
The reason why we didn't have a boundary redraw for the 2023 election was because
the census happened in the same year, and the legislation states that if the
two collide, it waits one year.
But I think we may have had in the past where there have been a couple of
elections very close to censuses, such as the census
2001 was very close to 2002, and
2002 also had a snap election, and we managed to cope with new
boundaries at that particular point with the
2001 census. So I'm not sure whether
there is the exact delay. It depends when the planning part starts happening.
That's the big part in there because the planning changes that for
2023 census, the electoral boundary changes
didn't happen until last year. Whereas
I would assume they would start in 2028 if the census happened or
right at the
beginning of 2029 to ensure those new boundaries were in place ready for
the 2029 general election.
Right. Is that right, Carl?
Yeah, I'm happy to leave it there, Chair.
All right.
Thanks, Sam.
Thank you.
Right. Now, last one before we're going to have a little bit of a break, and that
is Anna Muir who's coming in by
Zoom.
Anna, are you with us?
Just struggling with the camera.
That's right, Anna. We can hear you loud and clear.
Okay. Okay, now I've got a button to
use.
Okay, so...
Oh, there you are.
Yes. So it's good to join you again less than a week-
Yeah
... after the English Language Bill hearing.
I think there's some overlapping themes between
the English Language Bill and the Census Bill today.
This bill obviously relates to very complex
topics with lengthy historical origins.
So some of the different words
that we're using make it difficult to communicate
the concepts. So I guess along that line, I thought
it would be helpful for me to start by referring to
or by using the words about small
area information. So those are words that I've heard in the
hearing today.
They are on page 21 of Len
Cook's written submission.
I think it's 2.10 B. He
speaks about continuing the existing rich array of
small area information.There was an earlier
discussion suggesting that Port Waikato is an example of
small area. I'd like-
Yeah, very appropriate examples from both of you.
Yeah.
So I'd like to highlight
the needs of
central government and local authorities,
the areas that have unit titled developments.
As the recent purchaser of a unit titled,
a townhouse in Auckland, I have quite deep insights
about the problems in the central
government as well as Auckland Council data
processes for those scenarios.
That causes problems
not only for property transactions, but for planning purposes.
With Auckland being in the middle of the plan change 120
processes, there are some very unhelpful
narratives that are based
on,
I guess, poor data. So I have identified
some problems in central government data about unit
titled
properties and developments.
I have recommended in the second part of my written submission that the
Unit Titles Act of 2010 be amended so
there is a mandatory reporting obligation.
So central government data is shared more regularly,
more transparently, so all
relevant decision makers in public and private contexts
have access to that information.
Locally, there's
at least one story in the spin-off where people are saying, "Well, all of the
townhouses are being built in West Auckland since we had the
2016 Auckland Unitary Plan." Those
narratives are based on building consent data.
Whereas
I live in a 1985
townhouse that was built in a development
established under the Unit Titles Act of
1972 before digitized
processes came about. And so
the age of my property has resulted in some data
related problems,
a bit like Jonathan Godfrey's story earlier about how the
records of his blindness predate
digitized health records. So just coming back
to the base themes of population dwellings and digital
government,
depending on the age of a building on a property,
there are, I guess, gaps to be resolved if we can get better
collaboration between Statistics New Zealand and LINZ
and others, as Len Cook has recommended.
The first part of my submission
summarizes, I guess, the range of interested parties, and it
identifies some groups that are often overlooked.
So I think it would be worthwhile to specifically refer
to those groups if the bill proceeds and that particular
section is amended.
If we were really going to refine the statute book, we could also sharpen up
the New Zealand Business Number Act of 2016.
Just before I allow some time for questions, I did want to
note that I will make a supplementary submission because I have
an email from Auckland Council to explain why they
did not make a written submission.
I've just got a problem with the screen here.
So I'll send this through in writing, but the message I got from Auckland Council
on the 23rd of April was,
it was considered that an Auckland Council submission
would not affect the outcome of the proposed changes, which
was primarily related to the timing of the census and the role of the
government statistician to deliver an annual census.
There was no perceived contrast with Auckland Council's strategic
framework, and it was deemed low priority.
As a ratepayer in New Zealand's largest city, I find that
a pretty disappointing response from an unelected
representative of Auckland Council.
I recommend that your committee
requests
advice or information from Auckland Council with Maurice
Williamson being the former Minister of Statistics.
That should help to foster some sort of input.
But yeah, we're dealing with really important topics, so I
also support the other recommendations to involve
experts with a proper review.
Right. Thanks, Anna. We have heard from local government in New Zealand.
You probably heard that and-
But Auckland Council is different, and they're not a member of local government New
Zealand.
Well, I know.
The ratepayers of Auckland need to be represented-
I know. They're very special,
Anna
... by Auckland Council. No, let me-
They're very special
... let me add,
this is a procedural point actually partly I wanted to mention.
So it was a relatively lengthy public consultation period
from the 5th of March until the 15th of April.
They had a lot of time.
Okay.
It is disappointing that the submissions were only published on the Parliament
website on Friday.
I have hand delivered a copy of Len Cook's
submission to my friend, the Honorable Simon Watts,
Minister for Auckland and Minister of Local Government, and I pointed him
to recommendation three on the cover of Len
Cook's submission. It says, "I recommend that the Justice
Committee seek advice from those who are affected by the bill and local
government."
Hey, thank you, Anna. Thank you for that recommendation.
And your specific-
Yeah
... drafting suggestions, very helpful. Got a lot going for you.
Otago University law degree, very good.
And you're in the Epsom electorate, so-
Gee, I can't believe it
... gosh, Anna.
Yeah. Yeah.
Okay.
And I forgot to mention that Len Cook delivered the graduation
address at the University of Otago-
Oh. Unbelievable
... on the 6th of May 2000. So that set the
scene.
Unbelievable. Okay.
Thank you.
Thanks. Nice to see you again.
Okay. Thanks.
Cheers then. Bye-bye.
Right, members, we're going to have a break.
The idea is we can come back at 3:15. Is that right?
3:15. Excellent.
We've got a little bit of a break.
Do we get... Oh, the coffee.